.TH RNAHYBRID 1
.ER
.SH NAME
RNAhybrid \- calculate secondary structure hybridisations of RNAs
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBRNAhybrid [\-h] [\-b \fIhit_number\fB] [\-e \fIenergy_cutoff\fB] [\-p
\fIp-value_cutoff\fB] [\-c] [\-d \fIxi,theta\fB] [\-s \fIset_name\fB] [\-f
\fIfrom,to\fB] [\-m \fImax_target_length\fB] [\-n \fImax_query_length\fB] [\-u
\fIiloop_upper_limit\fB] [\-v \fIbloop_upper_limit\fB] [\-g (ps|png|jpg|all)]
[\-t \fItarget_file\fB] [\-q \fIquery_file\fB] [\fItarget\fB] [\fIquery\fB]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I RNAhybrid
is a tool for finding minimum free energy (mfe) hybridisations of a long
(target) and a short (query) RNA. The hybridisation is performed in a kind of
domain mode, ie. the short sequence is hybridised to the best fitting parts of
the long one. The tool is primarily meant as a means for microRNA target
prediction.  In addition to mfes, the program calculates p-values based on
extreme value distributions of length normalised energies.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Give a short summary of command line options.
.TP
.B \-b \fIhit_number
Maximal number of hits to show. \fIhit_number\fP hits with increasing minimum
free energy (reminder: larger energies are worse) are shown, unless the \-e
option is used and the energy cut-off has been exceeded (see \-e option below) or
there are no more hits. Hits may only overlap at dangling bases (5' or 3'
unpaired end of target).
.TP
.B \-c
Produce compact output. For each target/query pair one line of output
is generated. Each line is a colon (:) separated list of the following
fields: target name, query name, minimum free energy, position in target,
alignment line 1, line 2, line 3, line 4. If a target or a query is given
on command line (ie. no \-t or \-q respectively), its name in the output
will be "command line".
.TP
.B \-d \fIxi,theta
xi and theta are the position and shape parameters, respectively, of an extreme
value distribution (evd). p-values of duplex energies are assumed to be
distributed according to such an evd. For a length normalised energy en, we
have P[X <= en] = 1 - exp(-exp(-(-en-xi)/theta)), where en = e/log(m*n) with m
and n being the lengths of the target and the query, respectively. If the \-d
option is omitted, xi and theta are estimated from the maximal duplex energy of
the query, assuming a linear dependence. The parameters of this linear
dependence are coded into the program, but the option \-s has to be given to
choose from the appropriate set. Note that the evd is mirrored, since good mfes
are large negative values.
.TP
.B \-s \fIset_name
Used for quick estimate of extreme value distribution parameters (see \-d
option above). Tells RNAhybrid which target dataset to assume. Valid parameters
are 3utr_fly, 3utr_worm and 3utr_human.
.TP
.B \-e \fIenergy_cutoff
Hits with increasing minimum free energy (reminder: larger energies are worse)
less than or equal to \fIenergy_cutoff\fP are shown, unless the \-b option is
used and the number of already reported hits has reached the maximal
\fIhit_number\fP (see \-b option above). Hits may only overlap at dangling
bases (5' or 3' unpaired end of target).
.TP
.B \-p \fIp-value_cutoff
Only hits with p-values not larger than \fIp-value_cutoff\fP are reported.
See also options \-d and \-s.
.TP
.B \-f \fIfrom,to
Forces all structures to have a helix from position \fIfrom\fP to position
\fIto\fP with respect to the query. The first base has position 1.
.TP
.B \-m \fImax_target_length
The maximum allowed length of a target sequence. The default value is
2000. This option only has an effect if a target file is given with the \-t
option (see below).
.TP
.B \-n \fImax_query_length
The maximum allowed length of a query sequence. The default value is 30. This
option only has an effect if a query file is given with the \-q option (see
below).
.TP
.B \-u \fIiloop_upper_limit
The maximally allowed number of unpaired nucleotides in either side of an
internal loop.
.TP
.B \-v \fIbloop_upper_limit
The maximally allowed number of unpaired nucleotides in a bulge loop.
.TP
.B \-g (ps|png|jpg|all)
Produce a plot of the hybridisation, either in ps, png or jpg format,
or for all formats together. The plots are saved in files whose names are
created from the target and query names ("command_line" if given on the
command line). This option only works, if the appropriate graphics libraries
are present.
.TP
.B \-t \fItarget_file
Each of the target sequences in \fItarget_file\fP is subject to hybridisation
with each of the queries (which either are from the \fIquery_file\fP or is the
one query given on command line; see \-q below). The sequences in the
\fItarget_file\fP have to be in FASTA format, ie. one line starting with a \>
and directly followed by a name, then one or more following lines with the
sequence itself. Each individual sequence line must not have more than 1000
characters. If no \-t is given, either the last argument (if a \-q is given)
or the second last argument (if no \-q is given) to RNAhybrid is taken as a
target.
.TP
.B \-q \fIquery_file
See \-t option above.
.SH REFERENCES
The energy parameters are taken from:

Mathews DH, Sabina J, Zuker M, Turner DH.
"Expanded sequence dependence of thermodynamic parameters improves 
prediction of RNA secondary structure"
J Mol Biol., 288 (5), pp 911-940, 1999

The graphical output uses code from the Vienna RNA package:

Hofacker IL.
"Vienna RNA secondary structure server."
Nucleic Acids Research, 31 (13), pp 3429-3431, 2003

.SH VERSION
This man page documents version 2.0 of RNAhybrid.

.SH AUTHORS
Marc Rehmsmeier, Peter Steffen, Matthias Hoechsmann.

.SH LIMITATIONS
Character dependent energy values are only defined for [acgtuACGTU].
All other characters lead to values of zero in these cases.


.SH BUGS
In suboptimal hits, dangling ends appear as Ns if they were in the
first or last hybridising position of a previous hit.


.SH SEE ALSO
RNAcalibrate, RNAeffective
